Morning and welcome.
Thank you for coming in this morning. Good morning.
Thanks so much for Morning. Morning. Good morning.
Good morning. Thanks very much for the invitation.
Um, uh, I'm Brian Heska, the head of, uh, policy Evidence
and Insights at a CC.
And, um, I've got with me, um, Carly Woodham,
who's our principal advisor and hopefully online.
Um, we've got, uh, colleague
beaming in from our Manco office.
Um, he's our manager of operations payments.
Um, so he is, um, he's responsible for that interface
between a CC and ESD for processing the payments.
So if we need to turn to him for the expert, um,
expert detail on those parts, the, the process,
then he's available for that.
There is the great, um, look, thanks very much.
We haven't actually sent the committee any written material
for this session, um,
but we have worked, um, with NSD last week into the process,
um, for your consideration of the bo for their advice
that they provided you.
Um, uh, and we, we, you know, we
provided what we could within that timeframe.
I know that you'll definitely have questions that you wanted
to, to launch into, but would it be helpful if
we just gave a little bit of context?
Yes, please. As much upfront about
where things stand at the moment.
Um, we know that you,
you've probably got quite an interest just to sort of try
to understand a bit more about who these clients are.
Um, from accs perspective, um, we, um,
the difficulty there is that, um, uh, the,
the process payments that we have
with MSD are quite a manual process, so it's quite difficult
for us to isolate
and extract the data about those people from our systems in
the same way that MSDI think struggled to,
to extract those, that detail.
But what we have done over the last few days,
we've had a key person, um, just pull a sample
of cases over the last year.
It's a small sample, but of of 50 cases, um, that we, um,
can track where we've, where we've had back payments going
to MSD, um,
and what they show is, um, that, um, uh,
unsurprisingly about 65% of those were sensitive payments.
So those are how much?
About 65%, so about 33 out of that 50.
Um, and um, about, um, uh,
25% were, were at another category within,
within the remaining you've got things like treatment,
injury claims and, um, other serious injury claims.
Can you just say that again?
So, so about 4% treatment injury claims,
4% serious injury claims within that.
Um, and then the other 25% are made up of, um,
the other types of claims.
So those are things like, um, oh, actually, sorry.
Gradual process is the other small category.
I think that's about 2%.
Um, so the other kind of claims,
so those are late lodged claims or hearing loss claims
or other kind of complex, complex claims where we need
that time to, to work through things.
Mm-hmm. Um, unsurprising, I mean, you know, um, linked to
that, uh, we have done, we've been able to do a bit
of analysis about, um, gender breakdown.
So 70% are are female, um,
and, um, the age of those clients looks predominantly,
you know, quite a large volume towards the 50
to 70, um, range.
Um, about, um, uh,
what is that 2023 of, of those people are in
that higher bracket at the moment, that's their age now.
Um, but obviously the, the event, um,
may have occurred many years ago, particularly
for 4 cents claimants.
So those are some sort of basic kind of, um,
demographic details that we're able to get from that sample.
As I say, it's a very small sample, um,
and that kind of profile will change over time.
Mm-hmm. What we've seen, particularly in the last year
or couple of years, has been, uh,
quite a large growth of sensitive claims.
Mm-hmm. Generally, um, as there's been a higher profile
of attention, you know, with, um, survivors of state abuse
and, um, you know, other mechanisms
that have really supported people to come forward
to, to make these claims.
Mm. And of course, um, I think you've had notes that, uh,
the, the t in case that went through the court
of appeal at the end of 2024 has encouraged a lot of people
to come to us to now seek, um, a form
of weekly compensation called, um, loss
of potential earnings, um, that dates back to, uh,
particularly for people that were abused as children.
So hopefully that just sort of sets a little bit of context
that come Thank you, um,
found in the conversation today. So that, that
50, that's 50 of what, what's the Yeah,
So I mean, there 37,000 that Ms.
D, um, provided, you know, over the last kind
of 25, 27 years, I think.
Um, this is only, um, over one,
just looking back over the last year.
Um, but we get about, I think s can confirm,
but about 60 to 70 claims like that a month
that we do some sort of reimbursement with MSD.
So it is a, it is a obviously a point in time. Yeah.
Um, and, and a small, a small number.
Great. Thank you, Raquel.
Thank you so much for trying to at least get a sample.
Appreciate it. We've been struggling
to get a picture of who it affects.
Now for the lay person,
would you mind further expanding when you say
sensitive claims, I know this is,
I know this is quite a delicate issue.
Hmm. Would you mind expanding on what kind
of issues people may have been facing
and would you also expand why often these claims do take
quite some time to be basically processed?
Yeah. Um, because obviously we know
that the longer the claims get take to get processed,
the larger the debts are likely to be.
Yeah. Um, so if you wouldn't mind expanding on,
what are we talking about when you say sensitive claims?
Who are we talking about and also why did it take
so long? Sure.
So, so since the claimants are, um, covered under the act
where they, uh, are people who have, um, mental trauma from,
um, sexual abuse or other types of, um, sexual crimes
that are, um, prescribed in, in the act, um, the,
that that trauma can arise, um, many years
after the event, typically does the PTD that people or,
or other cognitive, um, psychological trauma
that people experience can arise many years after the event.
Sometimes, you know, uh,
people might not be launching a claim for, for decades,
in fact, after that event.
And that's what can make it quite difficult to, to unravel
so that when people have been seeking treatment, um,
you know, they'll be working with, with, um, counselors
and other and specialists to sort of understand, um,
you know, has that, can we first treat you
but also make sure that we understand, is that trauma linked
to though that event that occurred decades ago?
Or, um, are there other things
that have happened in your life that, you know, this, um,
PTD that you now, or cognitive, um, you know,
condition you're, you're displaying mm-hmm.
Links to, to other issues Yeah. That you might have. Just
A quick follow up, what kind of documentations
that people then have to produce?
Um, obviously it seems like can be a lengthy process talking
to lawyers and sensitive claimants.
Um, you know, what documents are people expected to have
to provide, um, which can further delay them being able
to get the claim?
Yeah. Well, there's, there's
different parts of the process.
So, um, the, the first part
of the process is just determining cover, you know,
does a person have a, a, um, an injury they can point to
that is covered by the scheme?
And that's, that's what, you know, a large amount of
that first process is, is involved looking at, um,
four sensitive payments that the benefit
that they do have is that we, during
that period will provide them with
what we call pre cover support.
So they get a number of hours of counseling that a CC, um,
pays for them in their early period, um, uh, both
through counseling and through other types of, um, of, um,
of supports in that period.
Can you just expand on what you mean by that early period?
What, like, while we
Are determined and cover while we are working through
that process with, um, with those, uh, those counselors
or other, um, medical professionals that they're seeing to,
um, to, to work through that process of,
of determining cover, once we, once we, um, provide
that cover, then, um, as I say, um, you know,
people can then, um, also, uh, come to us
to seek other entitlements.
Um, other than that the, the medical treatment
or the counseling, um,
and they can include financial, uh,
compensation entitlements.
And it's at that point where, um,
we will be often interfacing with NSD to understand,
you know, if you're a beneficiary at that point
or have been over that that time.
Um, and what we do in the first instance is sort of say,
look, you know, um, if we're covering you
and you need financial assistance,
we will then make an arrangement with NSD to hand
that person over to us so that we're paying them forward.
The next question is, can we work out whether we, um, uh,
you know, how long this, this period has been
and what that amount of back payment might be?
And that is a process where we are working with NSD to,
to determine, you know,
the period at which they've been on benefits or inside work
or, um, you know, with other kinds of supports.
And that's the kind of one of the key focus for
what we're talking about today is when we're reimbursing MSD
for, for lot for those kind of payments. M
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, look, I, I'm getting the picture
that it's very individualized.
There is no template That's right, absolutely.
Across all of the clients that you are working with,
but given that you are working so intensely
with such a large number of people mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Um, and,
and now the hiccup that we've got here with these, you know,
the retrospective, can you see the system and,
and where some streamlining
or some improvements could be made?
Yeah. Um, that's a, that's a good question.
Um, look, I, I think, um, we are working hard with SD
to make sure that we are processing claims and,
and working with them too
through those things. I'm not looking to
Drop anyone in it. Um,
No, no, no, no, of course not. Course,
It just seems, it just seems
to be quite a clunky arrangement in there.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, look, look, I think, you know, um,
we we're working within the, the settings that we,
that we've got, um,
and, um, in terms of that operational link, you know,
we are working closely with MSD to, to, to, to make that
as efficient as possible.
Um, you know, I might just check in with Ish as
to whether there's any other comments from,
from you ssh about
No, nothing, nothing more to add.
Um, other than just confirming that, you know,
it is lankey, it's, it's a manual.
The way we, the way we gather information from inland
revenue, earnings related information from inland revenue
and the benefit information from, um, from MSD
because of the, the, um, the, just the number
of years involved in all of this is very manual.
So we request the information manually,
we receive the information manually,
we do the calculations manually, and then we, you know,
and then we, we pay the client, right?
So all of that, uh, sending requests manually and receiving
and calculating takes, takes time.
Okay. So, and just another sub on that.
So, um, your comment within the settings that we've got,
are there some settings that could be improved
and, you know, the committee has looked at the, um,
you know, the, the data collection, um, ai.
Are there, are there other things that could assist? Mm.
Uh, pro probably, uh, I don't,
we haven't really looked into,
into those things specifically.
Um, you know, obviously from our side, from AC side, um,
we have done quite a bit of work to improve
how we are supporting sensitive claimants.
We've introduced a new service at the end of, um, December,
uh, 2024, um, which has been embedding over this year.
We've, um, markedly increased the number of providers
that are, um, working with us to support those clients.
But as I say, you know, we're seeing some very high volumes.
Um, and so, um, you know, that's a continuing focus for us
to make sure that we are getting people the,
the right supports at the right time.
So Sub material that is, man, what does manually mean?
Does that mean physical paperwork or email
On, on, on, on paper and send via email?
Right. Okay. That I can, I can see the challenge. Yeah.
Yeah. And, and just to add to what Brian earlier said,
I think, um, we are working very closely with MSD, um,
our operational teams are, uh, connected to the volume
of requests we're sending through
and working together on receiving the information quickly.
Um, so, uh, we, we've got, we've got that on, um,
underway to make sure that we don't add
to the delay ourselves
And, And obviously for them, and,
and I'm sure they would've commented on this, that, um,
you know, if they need to be looking back over 10 years,
20 years worth of records,
you know, that's, that's a process.
Um, but, um, that, that's quite a process for them
to be working through as well
to be those, those records as well.
Any Question, Ricardo?
Thank you very much. Um, so
have you received feedback, um, from sensitive claimants
that the process can be, I mean, they're no fault
of their own or potentially just
because of the, the way that things are right now
that the process can be retraumatizing,
and would you mind expanding on some of the feedback
that you've kind of had a little bit around
that retraumatizing experience
of having to go through the process?
Sure, sure. We are, we are really conscious of that,
and that was a key part of the, um, design
of the new service that we put into place from one December
with providers.
Mm-hmm. Um, that is a difficult process and mm-hmm.
Um, for, for anybody obviously,
and you know, our, um, case managers who support, um,
these clients working with these providers, you know, they,
they are well trained in trauma support Yes.
And know, you know, um, how to, how to work
through issues carefully with, with people.
But yes, of course, it, it is a
Difficult process and it's a follow up on that.
Would you mind expanding on the type of support that is
unlocked by eight months?
People get their claims from a CC
that perhaps they wouldn't be able to access
otherwise through, say, supports from MSD?
'cause I mean, it's not comparing apples with apples, right?
Like the, the support you are able to offer the support
that say other government agencies may not be able to offer
for sensitive claimants or, or other, um, claims.
Would you mind expanding on the type of support that only
the claim itself can end up unlocking? Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Um,
I mean, like you say, any a CC claimant, um,
who's eligible, who has injury related needs,
um, can access treatment.
Um, so for sensitive claimants, that's often counseling.
Um, and like Brian said, that can be available
during the cover assessment process as well.
Mm-hmm. Before someone has cover, there's also social,
what we call social rehabilitation,
which can include things like, um, home help, um,
attending care, um, help with transport, um, childcare,
those sorts of things as well.
And ity does not cover that assistance. Right.
It only, you can kind of unlock that assistance itself,
But they'll provide some kinds of levels
of support to, to some extent.
But obviously yes, our entitlements are, you know, um,
quite extensive under the act.
Yeah. Yeah. Martin, when it was yours,
A supplementary Yes.
Thank you. Um, Moderna, Moderna did the provider, um,
you said more providers.
What were the original number of providers
and what, what did you end up as an improvement?
Mm. Like what are we talking another 21 there?
Seven, or I'll
Just go back.
Um, gosh, uh, yes, I, I'm trying
to remember those numbers off the top of my head.
I think, um, I, I think I can recall
that they were in the region regionally of, um,
a a few hundred and we are now sort of expanded that too.
Um, a few thousand, um, um,
if we can follow up Yeah.
Detail if you, if you, if you want that, um, sorry,
I don't have that readily on hand,
but, um, it was an extensive
Right. Increase. Yeah.
And, and that, that's an improvement
that's working better.
That helps, uh, you know, that, so it, it's helpful,
it's good for people, it's good for the people in this,
in these particular scenario.
Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, I've got two different ones.
The first one is really a follow up on this issue
of the two different baskets,
and I just want to know, um, like if, if we look
beyond sensitive claims,
and I appreciate that's a very big deal.
Mm-hmm. Um, but if you take a claim, like a gradual process,
um, claim,
and in the situation as I understand it,
what you have been doing is you've been paying
across the main benefit at the time the claim has reached
that is being basically passed on to m and Steve,
but there has been no payment beyond that.
Um, so all of the things we, we had Hazel Armstrong mm-hmm.
In here talking about the port.
She's a, um, on the port
and those people get rehabilitated
with sort of gold standard.
They're back to work quickly.
If you take a worker like that
where there's a potential gradual process injury mm-hmm.
How different, how significantly different is
what somebody whose claim has been delayed
for five years mm-hmm.
To what they would've got and what happens.
One of the big issues that we've got is
how come a CC hasn't been knock
for knocking some of that stuff.
You see different things that MC have been given,
but there's so much less from the look of it than
what MC has been given.
So how come a CC hasn't been responsible for
paying at least the amount it would've likely paid?
Now I appreciate, it's really hard to know
how much would've been paid, but why is a CC
and particularly accredited employers
incentivized by a delay?
Why are they enriched by that? Mm-hmm.
And that's a big question.
It it, it is, it is.
I, I mean, I guess, um, just for context, it's important
to note that, um, there are statutory timeframes
that we do have to make decisions, um, within, um,
and yes, we can extend some of those timeframes, um,
where there are some, some complexities to work through,
but, you know, that does put some responsibility on us
and the accredited employers to make sure
that we're making decisions in a timely way.
Um, for, for some of those supports.
I mean, you know, you,
you mentioned gradual, um, gradual process.
Yes. Um, PE people will often be still being
supported during that period.
For example, if you have a cancer that we are trying
to work out, is this a Yeah.
Cancer that's from an exposure from an occupational
Support from a CC,
Um, well, well, you know, in terms of their treatment,
of course the, the cancer, you know, service is going
to continue to be supporting those
people through that process.
That's not a, that's not a,
and through that time yeah, it's not a
process that a c they'll
Just get it from the public health system. Well,
Well, that's right. As, as,
as does a CC, you know, in terms of purchasing
that ultimately.
So there's not necessarily a gap.
I appreciate there, but,
but basically what our submitters told us Yeah.
In start terms is yeah, there is a significant difference.
Sure, sure. They are missing out at every angle
and then we're asking them to pay back
what they got from M sd.
Mm-hmm. That just seems crazy to me.
What I would like the second question,
and you might not have time to answer it now,
but the waiver issue, we've come up with a, an amendment Mm.
Um, where we are putting it to the government
that they should amend this Lewis.
So at least the MSD have a capacity
to look at this in terms of equity
and work in the same way a CC already do
in other situations.
Would it be helpful to have you,
you use a waiver at the present time in
certain circumstances?
Would it be h helpful to have similar law?
And again, you might not be able
to answer this straight away,
but, so something that is comparable mm-hmm.
So you can work together. Mm-hmm.
I mean, I think that focus is obviously more on the
SD side in terms of their ability,
ability and it's politics too.
Exactly. So it's probably
not something that would
affect us directly. Could you confirm
That you do use a waiver in the way that the,
um, letter to the minister?
Have you seen the letter to the minister? No, I,
We Haven't seen that. Perhaps we
could provide that
and you could confirm that they write
and that, that that law is in place and working for you.
Mm, we, we, um, we are well over time. Sure.
So, uh, look, we, we will, um,
Thank you. We're very happy
to provide any further information.
I, I appreciate that. Thank you so much. Been helpful.
Thanks so much. Thank,
Observe.